The Hook Which Invokes the Blessings
A Supplication to the Life and Liberation of Rigdzin Jalü Dorje
by Do Khyentse Yeshe Dorje

emaho
Emaho!
dömé gönpo kunzang ö mingyur
The Primordial Protector, Küntuzangpo, the Buddha of Unchanging Light,
tsalnang yeshe rik ngé tsombu shar
Who arises as the appearing-radiance of the gathering of the five wisdoms;
tukjé gar gyur drodul trulpé ku
Transforming into the dance of compassion, the nirmāṇakāya that tames beings
ku sum yermé gönpo tsé tayé
And is indivisible from the three kāyas, Lord Amitāyus,
nyingjé rang zuk pakchok pekar chang
The embodiment of compassion, noble and supreme Holder of the White Lotus (Avalokiteśvara),
dro ngor nangwa tsokyé trulpé ku
The Lake Born Nirmāṇakāya (Padmasambhava), who appears in response to beings,
rikdak dorsem garab pawo dang
Lord of the Family, Vajrasattva, hero Garab Dorje,
yermé tötreng tsal la solwa deb
And the inseparable Guru Tötrengtsel, I supplicate.

gang khyö dong mar bö kyi dulwé dön
For the sake of those to be tamed, the red-faced Tibetans,
ta ü tamché ter gyi kang né kyang
You filled the whole of Tibet from center to its borders with treasures.
gang dang tuksé jebang trulpé ku
I supplicate you and your emanated heart-disciples, the king and subjects,
zabter gojé tsok la solwa deb
Who opened the gateway to those profound treasures.

dengdü nga trak tamé semchen kün
Currently, unbearable suffering is greatly increasing
zö ké dukngal ché cher chepé tsé
For all sentient beings of the final five-hundred-year period.
drimé garab pejung bi ma lé
During this time, I supplicate the supreme, single-embodied emanation
trulpa chikdü chok der solwa deb
Of Drimé Özer, Garab Dorje, Pema Jungné, and Vimalamitra.

lhum su shyuk né tingdzin mi yo shying
You entered the womb never wavering from samādhi.
tsepé shyak sum khandrö tsokdral drim
Three days after your birth, you roamed among the assembly of ḍākinīs,
da chü dü su khandrö wangkurwé
And when you were ten months old, you received empowerment from them—
rangjung trulpé ku la solwa deb
I supplicate the naturally arisen nirmāṇakāya.

drangja sum né palri rigdzin shying
At the age of the two, in Zangdokpelri (the Copper-Coloured Mountain), the realm of the awareness-holders,
trulshyir jal né wangkur jin gyi lab
You beheld the prominent nirmāṇakāya who conferred empowerment and blessings upon you—
pawo khandro rikden tsok kün gyi
I supplicate the one who is always watched over
meltsé taktu kyang der solwa deb
By the heroes and ḍākinīs of all the noble families.

ngön né jedren rikdak lama tsal
Recalling your previous lives, you searched for your lama, the Lord of the Family,1
tukjé jezung dü kyi yul lé gyal
Who lovingly and compassionately accepted you [as a disciple].
chö kyi dakpo rik kyi nyugu tsé
Victorious over the hordes of demons, your potential as a Dharma Lord was brought forth—
tendrel dü su min der solwa deb
I supplicate the one whose auspicious connections ripened on time.

shyönnü dü né ngejung kyoshé kyi
From a young age, with the sadness born from renunciation,
gyü kul nyin nang milam gyuma dang
You continuously saw daily appearances as an illusory dream,
tsen nang ku dang jazer tiklé dré
And at night you mingled the kāyas and the spheres of rainbow light—
ngön lé dü su min der solwa deb
I supplicate the one whose previous karma ripened on time.

chusum lön né kyedzok lam du shyuk
When you reached twelve, you entered the path of generation and completion [stage practices].
nyin dü rikdak lamé shyal tri dang
During the day, you received oral instructions of the Lama, the Lord of the Family,
tsen nang pawo daki datröpé
And during the night the heroes and ḍākinīs symbolically transmitted [the teachings]
salam kechik drö der solwa deb
By which you traversed the stages and paths in an instant— I supplicate you.

cho nga lön né ter gyi kha jang tob
When you reached fourteen, you obtained an inventory of treasures.
lamé tukkyé orgyen jinlab kyi
By the compassion of the Lama and the blessings of Orgyen (Guru Rinpoche),
sa ter gongpé ter du wanggyur né
You had the authority over earth and wisdom-mind treasures—
khandrö sangdzö wang der solwa deb
I supplicate the one who has the command of the secret ḍākinī treasury.

nyishu lön né mindrol kyedzok la
When you reached nineteen, having mastered the generation and completion phases of maturation
and liberation,
nga nyé rikdak nangwa tob né lar
You obtained permission from the Lord of the Family.
pawo khandrö lungten jishyin du
Once again, in keeping with the prophecy of the heroes and ḍākinīs,
naljor chöpa kyang der solwa deb
You maintained the yogic observances—I supplicate you.

lama yidam ngödrub chok nyé shying
You attained the supreme accomplishment of the lama and deity
nyendrub tarchin sek nen penpa yi
And defeated the attacks of unruly demons by completing the approach and accomplishment [stages
of deity practice],
ma rung dü kyi yulngo pam dzepé
And by burning, suppressing, and casting away [as found in those practices]—
yeshe rolpé dorjér solwa deb
I supplicate you, Yeshe Rölpa’i Dorje (Vajra of Primordial-Wisdom Display).

kyerim chakgya trawé naljor nyé
You obtained the subtle, yogic mudrā of the generation phase,
dzokrim tak chu yönten ta ru chin
Perfected the qualities of the ten signs of the completion stage,
dangmé tiklé a wa dhu tir ching
And held the pure vital-essence in the central channel—
drub nyé rigdzin chok der solwa deb
I supplicate the supreme and accomplished Awareness-Holder.

trekchö nang sem dré shing zungdzin shyik
By the [practice] of Cutting Through (trekchö), you mixed appearances and mind, thus destroying
subject-object grasping.
walab la ten drebü denyi tong
Relying on the [energy] waves, you beheld the resulting suchness.
tögal nyam nang gongpel ta dzokpé
Through the [practice] of Direct Crossing (tögel), the experiences and visions were increased
to their perfect culmination—
trulshyik jalü dorjér solwa deb
I supplicate Trülzhig Jalü Dorje (Indestructible Rainbow Body that Dismantles Delusion).

milam ösal nyam kyi nangwa la
In the experiential appearances of the clear light of dreams,
dé jé tsek dang khachö sachö né
You abided in the Tiers of Bliss and other celestial and terrestrial realms.
rigdzin pawo kha drötsok dral drim
You roamed among the assembly of awareness-holders, heroes, and ḍākinīs—
traktung pawö shyab la solwa deb
I supplicate at the feet of Traktung Pawo (Blood Drinking Hero).

tanyé shejé né la ma jang yang
Although you did not study the conventional fields of knowledge,
lhenkyé yeshe dewa chenpo yi
You completely unraveled the chakra of the Wheel of Enjoyment
longchö khorlö tsakhor yong shyikpé
By the great bliss of the innate, primordial wisdom—
dewé da jé pal der solwa deb
I supplicate Dewa’i Dorje Pel (Glorious, Blissful Vajra).

ngowo chökü gyalsar nga nyé kyang
You seized the royal seat of the essential Dharmakāya;
ma dak drowé lö lo tün nang dang
Still, you performed deeds to tame impure beings
tsampar gang la gang dul dön dzepé
According to their devotion, intelligence, and common perceptions—
tutob pawö shyab la solwa deb
I supplicate at the feet of Tutob Pawo (Hero of Power and Strength).

yangsang lümé khandrö tuk tik chö
To benefit the fortunate ones of the highest capacity,
mengak nyengyü yigé möpé kor
You properly taught the cycle without letters, the pith instructions of the hearing lineage,
wang rab kalden döndu lek ten né
The doctrine of The Extremely Secret Heart-Essence of the Formless Ḍākinīs.2
jalü ökü lam tön la solwa deb
I supplicate the teacher of the path of the rainbow body of light.

zukchen zukmé drowa tadak kün
With great love and compassion, you held limitless beings,
jam dang nyingjé chenpö jezung né
Both those with form and those without form,
ngö sam gyü né mindrol gor chuk ching
And, directly and indirectly, ushered them through the gates of maturation and liberation—
tsentab dzoksang gyé dzé la solwa deb
I supplicate the one who enacts the robust deeds of a perfected buddha.

dak sok khyé kyi duljar gyurpa nam
We who have become your disciples
lé nyön dukngal drakpö mün tum shing
Are enveloped in the darkness of the intense sufferings of karma and afflictions.
khyö kyi sang sum ting pak kawa yi
We are blind to the qualities of your three secrets, so difficult to fathom,
yönten tawé dren jé ché ré long
And the view that would guide us.

lé ngen wang gi tetsom lokta truk
By the power of negative karma, we are conflicted with doubt and wrong views
lok mön dü kyi dé tsok wang shor shying
And overpowered by the demonic masses of wrong aspirations.
tsawa yenlak damtsik nyam gal ral
Our root and branch samayas have deteriorated, been transgressed, and torn apart.
tingné gyöpa drakpö zöpar sol
With fervent, heartfelt regret, we pray for forgiveness.

mong dang nyam drok wang shor lokpar té
Influenced by ignorance and its close friend, wrong views,
shé shying kurpa deb dang demé kyi
I have abused and slandered,
nang ngor samshyin ma dak tsul ten né
And intentionally demonstrated impure behavior in the presence of those without faith.
tetsom kyé ching ngen drel gyi düpé
I have given rise to doubt and have amassed negative connections,
ting pak kawé gongpa ma tok shing
And because of this, I have not realized your unfathomable and all-subsuming enlightened mind.

ka gal tuk truk tuk sün kyön jö ching
I have opposed your command, upset and disturbed your mind, proclaimed faults,
chi dzé lek tong daknang drib gyurpa
And have diminished my pure perception that sees all that the master does as good.
yönten jesu drenpé zöpar sol
By remembering your qualities, I pray for forgiveness.

lamé tukgyü gongpé jinlab pö
Now, by the blessings transferred from the wisdom-mind of the guru,
dani lé ngen bakchak sab gyurpé
My negative karma and habitual tendencies are diminished.
lokpar mi tok nying né damcha dzin
Thus, from my heart, I vow not to hold onto wrong concepts,
tsewa chenpö jesu zung du sol
And I pray you lovingly hold me close.

gön khyö yönten gab ching kyön tönpé
Protector, you hide your qualities and display faults,
ma dak semchen gowo mong gyur ching
So that we impure sentient beings are fooled.
lekal denpa ang tetsom wang gyur chir
For the karmically fortunate beings under the sway of doubt,
ting pak kawé yönten ten du sol
Please reveal your unfathomable qualities.

dorjé ku la dré gü mi nga yang
The vajra body is not subject to decay or decline;
kutsé tarchin dro dön yongdzok shing
Yet I pray that your life reaches its fullest extent, so that you fully accomplish the benefit
of beings;
dadung khorwé jikten matongwar
And thereafter, until cyclic existence is emptied,
natsok trulpé dro dön dzé du sol
Please act to benefit beings through a myriad of emanations.

tsechik solwa tabpé drebu yi
By the fruit of this one-pointed supplication,
shyabtok tarchin dro dön yongdzok né
May I perfectly serve you and fully benefit beings.
zakpa bakchak chepa yong zé ching
Having done so, may the defilements and habitual tendencies be completely exhausted;
nang shyi tarchin jalü drubpar shok
May I perfect the four visions and attain the rainbow body!

gewé dro kün dukngal tso kem né
By this virtue, may sentient beings’ ocean of suffering dry up.
deshek nyingpo rangrig ngoshé shing
May they recognize the reflexive awareness, the essence of the Sugata.
tongnyi changchub sem kyi dré min né
May the fruit of emptiness-bodhicitta ripen!
ku sum gyalwé shying du ukyung shok
May they be assured in the realms of the victors of the three kāyas!

This was repeatedly and earnestly requested by the supreme Trochen Sawang Chok, and I was unable
to refuse his request. Although this has caused self-aggrandizement to come forth, I,
Jalü Dorje, in order not to disenchant those with faith, composed this supplication, which
suddenly arose and filled my mind, and the disciple, Özer Thaye, wrote it down.

| Translated by Ryan Jacobson, 2018.

Source: Ye shes rdo rje. "Rig 'dzin 'ja' lus rdo rje'i rnam thar gsol 'debs byin rlabs 'gugs
pa'i lcags kyu." In Mdo mkhyen brtse ye shes rdo rje'i rnam thar, pp. 406–413. Gangtok: Dodrupchen
Rinpoche, null. BDRC W18047

Version: 1.2-20211019
↑ This refers to the First Dodrupchen, Jigme Trinlé Özer (1745–1821). See: https://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/view/Dodrubchen-Jigme-Trinle-Wozer/TBRC_P293.↑
The Extremely Secret
Heart Essence of the Formless Ḍākinīs is a set of revealed treasures discovered by Do Khyentse
Yeshe Dorje. This cycle of teachings comprises the second and third volumes in his collection
of treasure teachings: the Self-Release of Fixation (’dzin pa rang grol) and the
Cycle for Accomplishing the Guru (bla sgrub kyi skor), respectively. For reference, see:
https://www.tbrc.org/#!rid=O3JT5188%7CO3JT51883JT5245$W1PD89990.